TITLE: Secrets of the Millionaire Mind - by T. Harv Ecker
ISBN: 0060763280
RATING: 3
SUMMARY: If you suspect that your mindset is holding you back from making more money, read this. Identifies and dissolves the mental baggage we've built up that believes money is evil and those who have it are greedy.
NOTES: 
WEALTH PRINCIPLEs:

Your income can only grow to the extent you do.

If you want to change the fruits, you first have to change the roots.  To change the visible, first you have to change the invisible.

Money is a result, wealth is a result, health is a result, illness is a result, your weight is a result.  We live in a world of cause and effect.

Give me five minutes, and I can predict your financial future for the rest of your life.

Thoughts lead to feelings.  Feelings lead to actions.  Actions lead to results.

When the subconscious mind must choose between deeply rooted emotions and logic, emotions will always win.

If your motivation for acquiring money or success comes from a nonsupportive root such as fear, anger, or the need to prove yourself, your money will never bring you happiness.

The only way to permanently change the temperature in the room is to reset the thermostat.  The only way to change your level of financial success "permanently" is to reset your financial thermostat.

Consciousness is observing your thoughts and actions so that you can live from true choice in the present moment, rather than being run by programming from the past.

You can choose to think in ways that will support you in your happiness and success instead of ways that don't.

Money is extremely important in the areas in which it works, and extremely unimportant in the areas in which it doesn't.

When you are complaining, you become a living breathing "crap magnet".

There is no such thing as a really rich victim.

If your goal is to be comfortable, chances are you'll never get rich.  If your goal is to be rich, chances are you'll end up comfortable.

The number one reason most people don't get what they want is that they don't know what they want.

If you are not fully totally and truly committed to creating wealth, chances are you won't.

The law of income : you will be paid in direct proportion to the value you deliver according to the marketplace.

Leaders earn a heck of a lot more money than followers.

The secret to success is not to try to avoid or get rid of or shrink from your problems; the secret is to grow yourself so that you are bigger than any problem.

If you have a big problem in your life, you are being a small person.

If you say you're worthy, you are.  If you say you're not worthy, you're not.  Either way you will live into your story.

If a hundred-root oak tree had the mind of a human, it would only grow to be ten feet tall.

For every giver there must be a receiver, and for every receiver there must be a giver.

Money will only make you more of what you already are.

How you do anything is how you do everything.

There's nothing wrong with getting a steady paycheck, unless it interferes with your ability to earn what you're worth.  There's the rub.  It usually does.

Never have a ceiling on your income.

Rich people believe you can have your cake and eat it too.  Middle-class people believe cake is too rich, so they only have a little.  Poor people don't believe they deserve cake, so they order a donut, focus on the hole, and wonder why they have nothing.

The true measure of wealth is net worth, not working income.

Where attention goes, energy flows, and results show.

Until you show you can handle what you've got, you won't get any more.

The habit of managing your money is more important than the amount.

Rich people see every dollar as a "seed" that can be planted to earn a hundred more dollars, which can then be replanted to earn a thousand more.

Action is the bridge between the inner world and outer world.

A true warrior can tame the cobra of fear.

It is not necesssary to try to get rid of fear in order to succeed.

If you are only willing to do what's easy, life will be hard.  If you are willing to do what's hard, life will be easy.

The only time you are actually growing is when you're uncomfortable.

Training and managing your own mind is the most important skill you could ever own, in terms of both happiness and success.

You can be right, or you can be rich, but you can't be both.

Every master was once a disaster.

To get paid the best, you must be the best.

*** WEALTH FILES:

Rich people believe "I create my life".  Poor people believe "life happens to me".

Rich people play the money game to win.  Poor people play the money game to not lose.

Rich people are committed to being rich.  Poor people want to be rich.

Rich people think big.  Poor people think small.

Rich people focus on opportunities.  Poor people focus on obstacles.

Rich people admire other rich and successful people.  Poor people resent rich and successful people.

Rich people associate with positive successful people.  Poor people associate with negative or unsuccessful people.

Rich people are willing to promote themselves and their value. Poor people think negatively about selling and promotion.

Rich people are bigger than their problems. Poor people are smaller than their problems.

Rich people are excellent receivers. Poor people are poor receivers.

Rich people choose to get paid based on results. Poor people choose to get paid based on time.

Rich people think "both". Poor people think "either/or".

Rich people focus on their net worth. Poor people focus on their working income.

Rich people manage their money well. Poor people mismanage their money well.

Rich people have their money work hard for them. Poor people work hard for their money.

Rich people act in spite of fear. Poor people let fear stop them.

Rich people constantly learn and grow. Poor people think they already know.




========= SOMEONE ELSE'S NOTES ON THIS BOOK:

p 10 WEALTH PRINCIPLE: Your income can grow only to the extent that you do!
...The vast majority of people simply do not have the internal capacity to create and hold on to large amounts of money and the increased challenges that go with more money and success. that, my friends, is the primary reason they don't have much money.

p 13 What you cannot see in this world is far more powerful than anything you can see. You may or may not agree with this statement, but to the extent that you do not apply this principle in your life, you must be suffering. Why? because you are going against the laws of nature, whereby what is under the ground creates what is above the ground, where what is invisible creates what is visible.

p 15 Now hear this: A lack of moeny is never, ever a problem. A lack of money is merely a symptom of what is going on underneath.

...All energy travels in frequencies and vibrations. therefore, each declaration you make carries its own vibrational frequency.

p 32 Money is not the root of the problem; fear is. What's even worse is that fear is not just a problem; it's a habit.

p 56 If victims aren't blaming, you'll often find them justifying or rationalizing their situation by saying something like "Money's not really important." Let me ask you this question: If you said that your husband or your wife, or your boyfriend or your girlfriend, or your partner or your friend, weren't all that important, would any of them be around for long? I don't think so, and neither would money!...No rich people believe that money is not important.

p 57 Try paying your bills with love. Still not sure? then pop on over to the bank and try depositing some love and see what happens.

p 58 ..Law of Attraction (says) "like attracts like", meaning that when you are complaining, you are actually attracting "crap" into your life.

...WEALTH principle: When you are complaining, you become a living, breathing "crap magnet".

..Have you ever noticed that complainers usually have a tough life? it seems that everything that could go wrong does go wrong for them. they say, "Of course I complain -- look how crappy my life is." And now that you know better, you can explain to them, "No, it's BECAUSE you complain that your life is so crappy. Shut up...and don't stand near me!"...Which brings us to another point. you have to make darn sure not to put yourself in the proximity of complainers. if you absolutely have to be nearby, make sure you bring a steel umbrella or the crap meant for them will get you too!

p 59 For the next seven days I challenge you to not complain at all. Not just out loud, but in your head as well. But you have to do it for the full seven days. Why? Because for the first few days, you may still have some "residual crap" coming to you from before. Unfortunately crap doesn't travel at the speed of light, you know, it travels at the speed of crap so it might take a while to clear out.

p 60 Wealth Principle: There is no such thing as a really rich victim!

p 61 It's time to decide. You can be a victim OR you can be rich, but you can't be both. Listen up! Every time, and I mean EVERY time you blame, justify or complain, you are SLITTING YOUR FINANCIAL THROAT...

It's time to take back your power and acknowledge that you create everything that is in your life and everything that is not in it.

p 63 When your intention is to have enough to pay the bills, that's exactly how much you'll get -- just enough to pay the bills and not a dime more....There's a big difference between being comfortable and being rich.

p 67 The universe, which is another way of saying "higher power," is akin to a big mail-order department. it is constantly delievering people, events and things to you. You "order" what you get by sending energetic messages out to the universe based on your predominant beliefs. Again, based on the law of Attraction, the universe will do its best to say yes and support you. But if you have mixed messages in your file, the universe can't understand what you want.

One minute the universe hears that you want to be rich, so it begins sending you opportunities for wealth. But then it hears you say, "Rich people are greedy," so the universe begins to suport you in not having much money. But then you think, "Having a lot of money makes life so much more enjoyable," so the poor universe, dazed and confused, restarts sending you opportunities for more money. The next day you're in an uninspired mood so you think, "Money's not that important." The frustrated universe finally screams "Make up your frickin' mind! I'll get you what you want, just tell me what it is!"

p 69 This is the warrior's way. No excuses, no ifs, no buts, no maybes--and failure is not an option. The warrior's way is simply: "I will be rich or I will die trying."

p 73 Wealth File #4: Rich people think big. poor people think small. "Everything changed the moment I began to think big." I refer you to the law of Income, w hich states, "You will be paid in direct proportion to the value you deliver according to the marketplace."

p 76 The world doesn't need more people playing small. it's time to stop hiding out and start stepping out. it's time to stop needing and start leading. it's time to start sharing your gifts instead of hoarding them or pretending they don't exist. It's time you started playing the game of life in a "big" way.

p 80 Rich people focus on what they want, while poor people focus on what they don't want. Again, the universal law states, "What you focus on expands." Because rich people focus on the opportunities in everything, opportunities abound for them...because poor people focus on the obstacles in everything, obstacles abound for them and their biggest problem is handling all the incredible obstacles they see.

p 92 Resenting the rich is one of the surest ways to stay broke. We are creatures of habit, and to overcome this or any other habit, we need to practice. Instead of resenting rich people, I want you to practice ADMIRING rich people, I want you to practice BLESSING rich people, and I want you to practice LOVING rich people. That way, unconsciously you know that when you become rich, other people will admire you, bless you, and love you instead of resent the heck out of you the way you might do them now.

Bless that which you want. if you see a person with a beautiful home, bless that person and bless that home... The point is, if you resent what people have, in any way, shape or form, you can never have it!

p 97 (people in your life with nonsupportive energy)...I respect myself and my life and i deserve to be as happy and successful as possible. they way I figure it, there are over 6.3 billion people in the world and there's no way I'm going to saddle myself with a downer. Either they move up or I move on!

Again, energy is contagious: either you AFFECT people or you INFECT people. The same holds true the opposite way around; either people affect you or infect you.... "Birds of a feather flock together." Did you know that most people earn within 20 percent of the average income of their closest friends? That's why you'd better watch whom you associate with and choose whom you spend your time with carefully.

p 100 My friends, it's not about "touching" millionairs, it's about deciding that you are just as good and worthy as they are, and then acting like it.

p 107 Wealth Principle: The secret to success is not to try to avoid or get rid of or shrink from your problems; the secret is to grow yourself so that you are bigger than any problem.

p 113 Wealth Principle: If you say you're worthy, you are.
If you say you're not worth, you're not.
Either way you will live into your story.

p 121 Say to yourself, hand on your heart: I AM AN EXCELLENT RECEIVER. I AM OPEN AND WILLING TO RECEIVE MASSIVE AMOUNTS OF MONEY INTO MY LIFE: Touch your head and say.."I have a millionaire mind!"

p 137 Wealth File #13 Rich people focus on their net worth. Poor people focus on their working income.

p 143 Wealth Principle: Where attention goes, energy flows and results show.

p 147 Wealth Principle: Until you show you can handle what you've got, you won't get any more!

p 153 Wealth Principle: Either you control money, or it will control you.

p 167 Wealth Principle: Action is the "bridge" between the inner world and the outer world.

p 169 Wealth Principle: If you are willing to do only what's easy, life will be hard. but if you are willing to do what's hard, life will be easy.

p 171 Wealth Principle: The only time you are actually growing is when you are uncomfortable.
